README.md, before:

# temperature-mortality

Code repository for "Understanding and addressing temperature impacts on mortality". This repo contains main scripts to replicate main statistical results (Figure 1, 2, 3, S1, S2, and S9) in the paper. The underlying EU and Mexico mortality data are public and provided below with merged temperature data; the US data are restricted use and available by application to the CDC and are not provided.

### System Requirements

**Software Dependencies:**
- R version 4.5.1 (or later)
- Required R packages:

  - `arrow` - for reading parquet files
  - `fastverse`
  - `tidyverse`
  - `fixest`
  - `matrixStats` 
  - `ISOweek`
  - `pammtools`
  - `tictoc`
  - `sf`
  - `ggnewscale`

**Operating System:**

- Tested on: macOS Sequoia 15.6.1
- Should work on any OS that supports R

**Hardware:**

- Minimum 24GB RAM recommended (for large datasets)
- At least 15GB free disk space for data files

### Installation Guide

Instructions and typical install time on a normal desktop computer.

1. Clone this repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/temperature-mortality.git
   cd temperature-mortality
   ```

2. Set working directory in R:
- Recommended: Open temperature-mortality.Rproj in RStudio (create via File → New Project → Existing Directory if needed)
- Alternative: Use `setwd()` to point to your cloned directory: `setwd("~/path/to/temperature-mortality")`

3. Typical install time ~ 5-10 mins
- Cloning the repo itself is very fast (<1 minute) since it's just code
- The main time is installing R packages (5-10 minutes typical for common packages)
- If users already have some packages installed, it will be faster

### Replication Instructions

### Figures 1, 2, 3, S1, S2, and S9

#### Step 1: Download and Organize Data

Download each country's data and place files in `data/[country_name]/cleaned`, where `country_name` is MEX, EU, or US. For each country, the data include three parquet files:

- `[country_name]Daily_temp_covariates.pq` contains daily observed temperatures
- `[country_name]FullPanel_complete.pq` contains aggregated and merged monthly panel (weekly for EU)
- `[country_name]TempBins_monthly_complete.pq` contains pre-calculated person days population exposure

**Mexico Data:**

1. `MEXFullPanel_complete.pq` [~1.57GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/iqw0eet98ivok94fbita4/MEXFullPanel_complete.pq?rlkey=v9c4ufv8a13ctutdnbug3v5uc&st=hqzn0l4t&dl=0)
2. `MEXDaily_temp_covariates.pq` [~933.4MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/fuqk3iq4rcmh51kc07avh/MEXDaily_temp_covariates.pq?rlkey=bk6us32lwds3x1f3jlgdzrh2d&st=8vtvwjof&dl=0)
3. `MEXTempBins_monthly_complete.pq` [~6.5MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/mwf7h6v1l940ttfy3ddbw/MEXTempBins_monthly_complete.pq?rlkey=w6c27kvnttswuhq98wh88tbfj&st=xelsvetb&dl=0)

**EU Data:**

1. `EUFullPanel_complete.pq` [~2.7GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/108e8ohy269thyhjsp90j/EUFullPanel_complete.pq?rlkey=r552u8o05x5k8eedpt8d7e2io&st=3qosof02&dl=0)
2. `EUDaily_temp_covariates.pq` [~402MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/28mzqrpn8d225440ytigp/EUDaily_temp_covariates.pq?rlkey=10460u0qlbehc27kdnjq2yu4j&st=765v3639&dl=0)
3. `EUTempBins_monthly_complete.pq` [~12.1MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/zr35tn5pczh1vyljyq7o2/EUTempBins_monthly_complete.pq?rlkey=46683aso0umbizbfb7zhixc1z&st=oh5pnx0v&dl=0)

**US Data:**

The US data are restricted use and available by application to the CDC and are not provided.

#### Step 2: Generate Analysis Dataframes

Run `MortalityTemp_combined_analysis_v2.R` to generate dataframes for plotting figures in the paper. The resulting outputs including bootstrap and plot dataframes will be saved in `processed/[country_name]`.

The `MortalityTemp_combined_analysis_v2.R` script requires several configurations. After each configuration change, the script needs to be run again:

**For Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure S9:**

- Set `country_name` = ["US", "EU", or "MEX"]
- Set `si_folder` = ["winsor"]
- Dataframes will be saved in `processed/[country_name]`

**For Figure S1:**

- Set `country_name` = ["US", "EU", or "MEX"]
- Set `si_folder` = ["log_rate"]
- Dataframes will be saved in `processed/[country_name]/log_rate` (log mortality rate as outcome)

**For Figure S2:**

- Set `country_name` = ["US", "EU", or "MEX"]
- Set `si_folder` = ["age_standardized"]
- Dataframes will be saved in `processed/[country_name]/age_standardized` (age standardized rate as outcome)

#### Step 3: Generate Figures

After completing Step 2, run `MortalityTemp_combined_plots_v2.R` to generate figures. The resulting figures will be saved in `fig/combined/`:

- Figure 1: `fig_1.pdf`
- Figure 2: `fig_2.pdf`
- Figure 3: `fig_3.pdf`
- Figure S1: `fig_2_log_rate.pdf`
- Figure S2: `fig_2_age_std_us_mex.pdf`
- Figure S9: `decade_fixed1970.pdf`

### Figures 4, 5, and 6

#### Step 1: Download and Organize Data

Download each country's data and place files in `data/[country_name]`, where `country_name` is MEX or US.

US data: 

1. `singleage_adjustment.csv`[~8.35KB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/74053cyzuoha47j3dfa0k/singleage_adjustment.csv?rlkey=266eo3eugc0chixzfurmk7a3n&dl=0)
2. `pop_panel_singleage.pq`[~27.96MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/zdes5va6xlmpdbr6dk9n6/pop_panel_singleage.pq?rlkey=f4len1nozbshac0q3bzg168ps&dl=0)
3. `us_temp.pq` [~1.96GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/4zjz4gos7sd8bbul1mw2y/us_temp.pq?rlkey=k2xv5hzwa6xslnmcyfgnnw0wn&dl=0)
4. `us_precip.pq` [~823.33MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/ppmm5er5k86c1l7mq14tt/us_precip.pq?rlkey=3wndfp4w202mksbjlousik3c5&dl=0)
5. `fully_monthly.pq` - data is not public so cannot be shared for replication
6. `CONUS_consistent_counties` [~15.98MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/ls3dqkf8xfpxqjbvp4ksc/CONUS_consistent_counties.gpkg?rlkey=7oftm4mxve65vqe5jlrxok1aj&dl=0)

Mexico data:

1. `daily_death_pop_income.pq` [~366.5MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/szfowpm04zjmizvw866yq/daily_death_pop_income.pq?rlkey=h5bjwtmf7kew0zj0f5by38ic8&dl=0)
2. `mexico_temp.pq` [~1.52GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/hv37en54tbyhgbaogfzuc/mexico_temp.pq?rlkey=7nul80l3auua579j3tmc4hq2v&dl=0)
3. `mexico_precip.pq` [~653.19MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/g5ikw804xf4l2mtxcgzr9/mexico_precip.pq?rlkey=j2z2y136k5b2d0j0j33ballmw&dl=0)
4. `adm2_to_order.csv` [~29.42KB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/06my16kddud0pg9pb1jag/adm2_to_order.csv?rlkey=xmxfo2ymhp45tw2r0j3gt0vca&dl=0)
5. `monthly_death_pop_income.pq` [~302.46MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/kdmxy0kyblzdpjc8rudtz/monthly_death_pop_income.pq?rlkey=487n9d7gclc1hcv65ufwkfsbl&dl=0)
6. `monthly_weather.pq` [~2.33GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/a25gcczxtx7jhu7vv1g0p/monthly_weather.pq?rlkey=5vpl3qdxu0jijzl3d6gni2dlc&dl=0)
7. `full_monthly.pq` [~1.69GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/emswcm2vhz26cpmgao44r/full_monthly.pq?rlkey=qt0jlm01yarkogb2bn5q05342&dl=0)
8. `harmonized_1990.shp` [~6.84MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/ksbdkrjd76ayhqw3o64ov/mexico.gpkg?rlkey=3xq7rnbl6c1g5vfa78zwgvw2i&dl=0)

Europe data: 

1. `full_weekly.pq` [~146.MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/txd2ajouz26hjo4u2x7yt/full_weekly.pq?rlkey=kre5ziioq7c9g5uw38yo2kubm&dl=0)
2. `eu_nuts3_2024.gpkg` [~29.46MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/kr61s2lurcsia3jmldjo7/eu_nuts3_2024.gpkg?rlkey=au9iwm8gj0av6xvx4qdeevf4k&dl=0)

World map:

1. `geoBoundariesCGAZ_ADM0` [~154.63](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/8geqx7i7q4m90snvdgmsh/geoBoundariesCGAZ_ADM0.gpkg?rlkey=81mz0k6nbnhbp1o0uhb8xtdhj&dl=0)

#### Step 2: Generate Figures

Run the following scripts to generate figures. The resulting figures will be saved in `fig/combined/`:

- For Figure 4: Run `age_lag_response_us_mexico.R` -> outputs `lag_age_response.pdf`
- For Figure 5: Run `by_cause_us_mexico.R` -> outputs `cause.pdf`
- For Figure 6: Run `us_mex_eu_maps.R` -> outputs `maps/...`

### Expected Output and Runtime

Expected output and expected run time for execution on a normal desktop computer: ...

Commit message:

Update README with MIT license information
Added licensing information for the project.

README.md, after:

# temperature-mortality

Code repository for "Understanding and addressing temperature impacts on mortality". This repo contains main scripts to replicate main statistical results (Figure 1, 2, 3, S1, S2, and S9) in the paper. The underlying EU and Mexico mortality data are public and provided below with merged temperature data; the US data are restricted use and available by application to the CDC and are not provided. This project is licensed under the terms of the MIT license.

### System Requirements

**Software Dependencies:**
- R version 4.5.1 (or later)
- Required R packages:

  - `arrow` - for reading parquet files
  - `fastverse`
  - `tidyverse`
  - `fixest`
  - `matrixStats` 
  - `ISOweek`
  - `pammtools`
  - `tictoc`
  - `sf`
  - `ggnewscale`

**Operating System:**

- Tested on: macOS Sequoia 15.6.1
- Should work on any OS that supports R

**Hardware:**

- Minimum 24GB RAM recommended (for large datasets)
- At least 15GB free disk space for data files

### Installation Guide

Instructions and typical install time on a normal desktop computer.

1. Clone this repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/yourusername/temperature-mortality.git
   cd temperature-mortality
   ```

2. Set working directory in R:
- Recommended: Open temperature-mortality.Rproj in RStudio (create via File → New Project → Existing Directory if needed)
- Alternative: Use `setwd()` to point to your cloned directory: `setwd("~/path/to/temperature-mortality")`

3. Typical install time ~ 5-10 mins
- Cloning the repo itself is very fast (<1 minute) since it's just code
- The main time is installing R packages (5-10 minutes typical for common packages)
- If users already have some packages installed, it will be faster

### Replication Instructions

### Figures 1, 2, 3, S1, S2, and S9

#### Step 1: Download and Organize Data

Download each country's data and place files in `data/[country_name]/cleaned`, where `country_name` is MEX, EU, or US. For each country, the data include three parquet files:

- `[country_name]Daily_temp_covariates.pq` contains daily observed temperatures
- `[country_name]FullPanel_complete.pq` contains aggregated and merged monthly panel (weekly for EU)
- `[country_name]TempBins_monthly_complete.pq` contains pre-calculated person days population exposure

**Mexico Data:**

1. `MEXFullPanel_complete.pq` [~1.57GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/iqw0eet98ivok94fbita4/MEXFullPanel_complete.pq?rlkey=v9c4ufv8a13ctutdnbug3v5uc&st=hqzn0l4t&dl=0)
2. `MEXDaily_temp_covariates.pq` [~933.4MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/fuqk3iq4rcmh51kc07avh/MEXDaily_temp_covariates.pq?rlkey=bk6us32lwds3x1f3jlgdzrh2d&st=8vtvwjof&dl=0)
3. `MEXTempBins_monthly_complete.pq` [~6.5MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/mwf7h6v1l940ttfy3ddbw/MEXTempBins_monthly_complete.pq?rlkey=w6c27kvnttswuhq98wh88tbfj&st=xelsvetb&dl=0)

**EU Data:**

1. `EUFullPanel_complete.pq` [~2.7GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/108e8ohy269thyhjsp90j/EUFullPanel_complete.pq?rlkey=r552u8o05x5k8eedpt8d7e2io&st=3qosof02&dl=0)
2. `EUDaily_temp_covariates.pq` [~402MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/28mzqrpn8d225440ytigp/EUDaily_temp_covariates.pq?rlkey=10460u0qlbehc27kdnjq2yu4j&st=765v3639&dl=0)
3. `EUTempBins_monthly_complete.pq` [~12.1MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/zr35tn5pczh1vyljyq7o2/EUTempBins_monthly_complete.pq?rlkey=46683aso0umbizbfb7zhixc1z&st=oh5pnx0v&dl=0)

**US Data:**

The US data are restricted use and available by application to the CDC and are not provided.

#### Step 2: Generate Analysis Dataframes

Run `MortalityTemp_combined_analysis_v2.R` to generate dataframes for plotting figures in the paper. The resulting outputs including bootstrap and plot dataframes will be saved in `processed/[country_name]`.

The `MortalityTemp_combined_analysis_v2.R` script requires several configurations. After each configuration change, the script needs to be run again:

**For Figure 1, Figure 2, Figure 3, Figure S9:**

- Set `country_name` = ["US", "EU", or "MEX"]
- Set `si_folder` = ["winsor"]
- Dataframes will be saved in `processed/[country_name]`

**For Figure S1:**

- Set `country_name` = ["US", "EU", or "MEX"]
- Set `si_folder` = ["log_rate"]
- Dataframes will be saved in `processed/[country_name]/log_rate` (log mortality rate as outcome)

**For Figure S2:**

- Set `country_name` = ["US", "EU", or "MEX"]
- Set `si_folder` = ["age_standardized"]
- Dataframes will be saved in `processed/[country_name]/age_standardized` (age standardized rate as outcome)

#### Step 3: Generate Figures

After completing Step 2, run `MortalityTemp_combined_plots_v2.R` to generate figures. The resulting figures will be saved in `fig/combined/`:

- Figure 1: `fig_1.pdf`
- Figure 2: `fig_2.pdf`
- Figure 3: `fig_3.pdf`
- Figure S1: `fig_2_log_rate.pdf`
- Figure S2: `fig_2_age_std_us_mex.pdf`
- Figure S9: `decade_fixed1970.pdf`

### Figures 4, 5, and 6

#### Step 1: Download and Organize Data

Download each country's data and place files in `data/[country_name]`, where `country_name` is MEX or US.

US data: 

1. `singleage_adjustment.csv`[~8.35KB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/74053cyzuoha47j3dfa0k/singleage_adjustment.csv?rlkey=266eo3eugc0chixzfurmk7a3n&dl=0)
2. `pop_panel_singleage.pq`[~27.96MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/zdes5va6xlmpdbr6dk9n6/pop_panel_singleage.pq?rlkey=f4len1nozbshac0q3bzg168ps&dl=0)
3. `us_temp.pq` [~1.96GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/4zjz4gos7sd8bbul1mw2y/us_temp.pq?rlkey=k2xv5hzwa6xslnmcyfgnnw0wn&dl=0)
4. `us_precip.pq` [~823.33MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/ppmm5er5k86c1l7mq14tt/us_precip.pq?rlkey=3wndfp4w202mksbjlousik3c5&dl=0)
5. `fully_monthly.pq` - data is not public so cannot be shared for replication
6. `CONUS_consistent_counties` [~15.98MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/ls3dqkf8xfpxqjbvp4ksc/CONUS_consistent_counties.gpkg?rlkey=7oftm4mxve65vqe5jlrxok1aj&dl=0)

Mexico data:

1. `daily_death_pop_income.pq` [~366.5MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/szfowpm04zjmizvw866yq/daily_death_pop_income.pq?rlkey=h5bjwtmf7kew0zj0f5by38ic8&dl=0)
2. `mexico_temp.pq` [~1.52GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/hv37en54tbyhgbaogfzuc/mexico_temp.pq?rlkey=7nul80l3auua579j3tmc4hq2v&dl=0)
3. `mexico_precip.pq` [~653.19MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/g5ikw804xf4l2mtxcgzr9/mexico_precip.pq?rlkey=j2z2y136k5b2d0j0j33ballmw&dl=0)
4. `adm2_to_order.csv` [~29.42KB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/06my16kddud0pg9pb1jag/adm2_to_order.csv?rlkey=xmxfo2ymhp45tw2r0j3gt0vca&dl=0)
5. `monthly_death_pop_income.pq` [~302.46MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/kdmxy0kyblzdpjc8rudtz/monthly_death_pop_income.pq?rlkey=487n9d7gclc1hcv65ufwkfsbl&dl=0)
6. `monthly_weather.pq` [~2.33GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/a25gcczxtx7jhu7vv1g0p/monthly_weather.pq?rlkey=5vpl3qdxu0jijzl3d6gni2dlc&dl=0)
7. `full_monthly.pq` [~1.69GB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/emswcm2vhz26cpmgao44r/full_monthly.pq?rlkey=qt0jlm01yarkogb2bn5q05342&dl=0)
8. `harmonized_1990.shp` [~6.84MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/ksbdkrjd76ayhqw3o64ov/mexico.gpkg?rlkey=3xq7rnbl6c1g5vfa78zwgvw2i&dl=0)

Europe data: 

1. `full_weekly.pq` [~146.MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/txd2ajouz26hjo4u2x7yt/full_weekly.pq?rlkey=kre5ziioq7c9g5uw38yo2kubm&dl=0)
2. `eu_nuts3_2024.gpkg` [~29.46MB](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/kr61s2lurcsia3jmldjo7/eu_nuts3_2024.gpkg?rlkey=au9iwm8gj0av6xvx4qdeevf4k&dl=0)

World map:

1. `geoBoundariesCGAZ_ADM0` [~154.63](https://www.dropbox.com/scl/fi/8geqx7i7q4m90snvdgmsh/geoBoundariesCGAZ_ADM0.gpkg?rlkey=81mz0k6nbnhbp1o0uhb8xtdhj&dl=0)

#### Step 2: Generate Figures

Run the following scripts to generate figures. The resulting figures will be saved in `fig/combined/`:

- For Figure 4: Run `age_lag_response_us_mexico.R` -> outputs `lag_age_response.pdf`
- For Figure 5: Run `by_cause_us_mexico.R` -> outputs `cause.pdf`
- For Figure 6: Run `us_mex_eu_maps.R` -> outputs `maps/...`

### Expected Output and Runtime

Expected output and expected run time for execution on a normal desktop computer: ...
